+++
title = "Causal gene regulatory network inference using enhancer activity as a causal anchor"
date = "2018-01-01"
publication_types = ["2"]
authors = ["Deepti Vipin", "Lingfei Wang", "Guillaume Devailly", "Tom Michoel", "Anagha Joshi"]
publication = "In: bioRxiv, _pp. 311167_, https://doi.org/10.1101/311167, https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/05/03/311167"
abstract = "Motivation: Transcription control plays a crucial role in establishing a unique gene expression signature for each of the hundreds of mammalian cell types. Though gene expression data has been widely used to infer the cellular regulatory networks, the methods mainly infer correlations rather than causality. We propose that a causal inference framework successfully used for eQTL data can be extended to infer causal regulatory networks using enhancers as causal anchors and enhancer RNA expression as a readout of enhancer activity. Results: We developed statistical models and likelihood-ratio tests to infer causal gene regulatory networks using enhancer RNA (eRNA) expression information as a causal anchor and applied the framework to eRNA and transcript expression data from the FANTOM consortium. Predicted causal targets of transcription factors (TFs) in mouse embryonic stem cells, macrophages and erythroblastic leukemia overlapped significantly with experimentally validated targets from ChIP-seq and perturbation data. We further improved the model by taking into account that some TFs might act in a quantitative, dosage-dependent manner, whereas others might act predominantly in a binary on/off fashion. We predicted TF targets from concerted variation of eRNA and TF and target promoter expression levels within a single cell type as well as across multiple cell types. Importantly, TFs with high-confidence predictions were largely different between these two analyses, demonstrating that variability within a cell type is highly relevant for target prediction of cell type specific factors. Finally, we generated a compendium of high-confidence TF targets across diverse human cell and tissue types. Availability: Methods have been implemented in the Findr software, available at https://github.com/lingfeiwang/findr Contact: Tom.Michoel@roslin.ed.ac.uk, Anagha.Joshi@roslin.ed.ac.uk"
abstract_short = ""
image_preview = ""
selected = false
projects = []
tags = []
url_pdf = ""
url_preprint = ""
url_code = ""
url_dataset = ""
url_project = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_poster = ""
url_source = ""
math = true
highlight = true
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""
+++
